in 2006 the readers of the British
Medical Journal voted for the greatest
medical advance of the last 200 years
they didn't choose surgery or anesthesia
or the pill they chose the toilet not
maybe a fancy toilet like this one which
comes from the World Toilet organization
that's the other WTO expo but a basic
flush toilet has probably added 20 years
to the Western human lifespan however in
2012 2.6 billion people have no
sanitation whatsoever not a toilet not a
bucket not a bag not a box that's 2 out
of 5 people who have to do with
something that looks like this that's a
lot of crap lying around why does that
matter it matters because is a
weapon of mass destruction
it can carry 50 diseases viruses
bacteria e.coli cholera you name it it
loves to travel in for most of us
in this room we think diarrhea is a joke
maybe we get it from a dodgy kebab or a
bad takeaway it goes away in a couple of
days it's the squid it's the runs it's
Delhi Belly but every 15 seconds
something as stupid as diarrhea kills a
child somewhere in the world
that's 1.1 million children dying every
year from something banal and stupid
it's the second biggest killer of
children in the world it kills more
children than HIV AIDS TB measles or all
those three things put together it's not
just children in sub-saharan Africa 50%
of hospital beds are filled with people
suffer from what is known as water
related diseases they're actually poop
related diseases why can't we say that
their poop related because we're too
embarrassed because government think
that voters don't want to know about
toilets so do charities you'll see a
celebrity standing in front of a shiny
water tap gushing out clean water but
I've never seen Angelina Jolie standing
in front of a toilet however that toilet
that she won't stand in front of reduces
disease by 40 percent that's twice as
much as clean water
alone a toilet can do so much for you it
can put you back in school 20% of
children girl children drop out of
school because they don't have a toilet
and they don't go back it can put you in
work government's lose 5% of GDP to
hospital costs and absenteeism due to
poor sanitation it can earn you money if
you invest a dollar in sanitation you
save eight dollars that's a bargain in
health economics and if all that doesn't
persuade you it can get you laid a
toilet in India is now being used in a
social campaign which has been dubbed no
loo no I do
because brides refuse to marry into a
family that doesn't have a toilet and
it's working
it's not just a toilet that can save
your life poop itself can actually save
your life because it carries beneficial
bacteria as well as all those nasty bugs
this is an operating theater in Brooklyn
New York and that woman is about to get
a dose of donated human feces it's
called a fecal transplant and most
surgeons have exactly the same reaction
that you just did which is why it's
hardly done anywhere however it's got a
91 percent success rate she's been
suffering from the super bug called
c-diff for years and suffered horribly
she's tried also sponsored by otics-rio
civ poop and she's cured in half an hour
that sounds dramatic but it's true poop
can also grow your food it's a great
fertilizer we eat food we excrete it and
we excrete nutrients like potassium
phosphate nitrogen
apparently if you pee on your orchard
you get very crunchy apples in Rwanda
they get 75% of their cooking fuel from
biogas which is taken from digested
sewage from prisoners latrines these are
actually a bunch of genocidal murderers
stirring sewage which is then going to
cook their dinner and yet in somewhere
like the UK routinely every wastewater
utility just burns off methane the
minute we started putting our waste as
we call it into clean drinking water in
the mid 19th century we started
neglecting the fact that it was a
resource we saw it simply as waste and
we stopped talking about it we put the
toilet behind the locked door
and we shoved it out of conversation at
the same time does it need to be that
way no it doesn't in Japan they've had a
toilet revolution in the last 70 years
70 years ago they used pit latrines now
as routine they have something called a
wash lat toilet there are more Wachtell
at toilets in Japan than there are
personal computers they have an inbuilt
b-day nozzle which is clean to you
better than toilet paper and I know
except ride it they have heated seats
they have an automatic lid raising
function which is known as the marriage
saver but most importantly what Japan
has done is decide that the toilet is
talkable it's a normal household product
it gets innovated it sees creativity
applied to it and they talk about it 30
years ago hiv/aids campaign has faced a
similar problem sanitation activists
they had an unspeakable subject what did
they do they carried on talking about it
and talking now we can say sex we can
say condoms what we need to do in the
face of a public health emergency is to
talk we want more talking and less
killing thank you